Awesome. Well, I'm very excited to be here. And thanks to everybody for organizing this.
I'll just go ahead and get started. So yeah, the focus of the day will be sports tracking data,
specifically really NFL tracking data and the Big Data Bowl. I listed my Twitter there at
data with bliss. Feel free if there are any follow up questions to contact me there or
and also I just tweeted out links to both the Kaggle competition, the Big Data Bowl and the
code that I will be sharing today. So if you want to follow along as we go, it should be easy to do
so. So first of all, what is sports tracking data? Why is it important? Why is it interesting?
Um, essentially, what it is, is we know a sport like, for example, in the NFL here,
um, we don't just record maybe what happened, the outcome of the play, whether in NBA, maybe it's a
made basket and baseball, maybe it's a hit in hockey, maybe it's a pass. We're not we're sort
of going a step further. And actually, throughout the entirety of a given play, or series of plays,
we're looking at the X, Y coordinates where the players actually are. And that can give us a lot
more information. And this is relatively new data. A lot of sports analytics, like other data sources
might go back a little bit further. For example, there's NFL play by play data going back to about
1999. But this tracking data, this this, that sort of gives more information than just the what's
going on in the play in terms of the outcome, that's actually giving the coordinates of every
player throughout the play that this is relatively new. And another thing to note is it's not
typically publicly available. The NBA has a little bit of it publicly available. But outside of the
big data bowl, for NFL, at least there really isn't any source that I know of that that's
publicly available. And the last thing I was going to sort of say before I move on was,
there's sort of two types of tracking data, you can use video, which is used in other leagues,
such as the NBA and the NHL and soccer, where maybe you're, you use the same broadcast, you
see the video, and you convert the images of the video into X, Y coordinates. Or what the NFL does
is they use RFID chips. So literal radio chips that are going to be in the shoulder pads of every
single player and in the ball that relays to a sort of a source radio. And that will, and it'll
constantly be measuring where the players are throughout the entirety of the play. So that's
what NFL tracking data is based on these radio coordinates. And that's sort of what we're going
to be discussing today. So next, what is the big data ball? So it's an online, free to sign up
competition, I encourage everybody who's interested after this to look at it, think about
signing up. The focus is on this NFL tracking data that I'm discussing. And the goal is, we give
folks the data, they have an opportunity to analyze it, create new metrics, do fun stuff, visualize
it. And typically, what it also like, as the league, we get to see a lot more cool new content.
And also as a league, it sort of provides a pipeline for NFL team hires, and honestly, also
other sports team hires. It shows others that you have this skills to work with this, this complex
data, and a lot of teams are sort of asking for this. And it's a good way to show off your skills
and provide new contact and create some cool stuff. This is a very, very general timeline of
what the big data ball typically is. Typically, the oops, I'm so sorry. Typically, the
it starts in September, October, the submission deadline is November to January.
Then there's judging, the winners are announced. And we're unsure what will happen this year with
COVID. But typically, the winners have presented in the past at the NFL scouting combine in February
and March. And eventually, the work is submitted into production by teams by the league, and
it becomes useful. So yeah, currently, we're in the middle of the 2022 big data ball, which
launched in late September, and we'll go through January. So definitely not too late to sign up if
those are interested. So here's a quick overview of what the big data ball competitions have looked
like in the past. We've had three in the past, we're currently in the middle of our fourth.
The first big data ball was fairly open ended. We shared a bunch of tracking data. And we were
asking folks to look at stuff involving route combinations. So sort of how a receiver might
run to try to get open rule changes and which how the rules the games will be in their speed.
The second one in 2020, what the focus was expected rushing yards. And I don't know if anyone
has seen the rush yards over expectation metric. That's something that that stemmed from the big
data ball. And last year, we were looking at the secondary. And so that's defensive players and
coverage trying to prevent other players from from catching. So so all three years have been
very cool. A lot of very good stuff has come out of each of them. And so it's been really fun so far.
And I guess the other thing I would like to note is, each year, we have more, sort of, we have
a lot of entrants, we're getting more entrants, a lot more attendees, it's growing, and we're
seeing NFL hires each year. The first year, we had 11, then three, then seven. There's a cash prize
that goes to the winner. A lot of countries are participating. For example, in 2020, there were
32 different countries. The reason 2020 maybe got a little bit more than the other years is
there was this was sort of a traditional category competition, the sense that there was one metric
where other years it was more open ended, and it was more submission based. And that's that's how
it works this year. But yeah, participants, we get a lot of participants. And typically, we see some
NFL hires from it. So my final slide is I do this brief overview. I'm gonna talk about the 2022 big
data ball, that's the one that's going on today. Again, the September to January and essentially
what participants are asked to submit is a Kaggle notebook that will have the that that will show
sort of a analysis results. The goal is to submit a paper that gives information that someone can
read and learn something new. And the theme is NFL special teams plays, which that includes kickoffs,
field goals, punts, as opposed to offensive and defensive plays. And also, we also are
including some external data, which which comes from pro football focus. So this is the first
year where we actually go across three years, which is pretty cool. And there's a lot of cool
data that we're sharing. And obviously, you can see on Twitter, you can see right here,
we encourage people to check it out on kaggle.com slash NFL big data ball 2022.
So with that, I'm going to share a quick animation of what this data looks like. And then I think
I'm going to take a quick pause for questions after I show this animation before I get into
the code. So right here, we're going to look at a video of some data that we could see during
that that's included in the NFL Big Data Bowl. 2022. It's some tracking data involving a kickoff
play by the Bears and the Vikings. And I'm going to sort of show what it what the video looks like
and what the actual play looks like. So as you can see, this is before the video starts,
we have some players lined up. And they align with the players lined up there. So the players
in the video in white, that's the Vikings, they're white here and players in dark blue,
which are the Bears are here. So I'm going to play the animation, the video at the same time.
And this is just to give a sense of really what we're doing is we're just taking the video,
we're taking what actually is happening in the game. And we're just translating it to data to x,
y coordinates, so we can analyze players in place. So I guess at the same time,
so you can see in the video, it's moving in the ball. See, now the player has the ball and he's
running up the field. And the video is not working. Sometimes this happens. But you can see now the
the player with the balls is running towards the end zone. And you can see that in the video and in
the animation. So this is just a way to analyze what's actually happening in the game. And we now
have x, y coordinates. It just it's a good way to see how everything is working. And it's it's
efficient. It's easier than just watching every play per se. So with that, I'm gonna do a quick
break for questions. And then afterwards, I'm going to get into the code.
Thanks so much, Tom, I just took a quick look at the slide. Oh, and I don't see any specific
questions on the big data bowl yet. I'm going to check again, but feel free to raise your hand and
I can turn on the ability for people to unmute themselves for a second as well.
And we can also save questions for this till the end as well. Yeah, yeah, that's fine. Yeah. So if
there aren't any questions, what is the sampling rate for the data? That's a great question. So 10
times a second. We do a reading. So every 10th of a second.
Cool. All right. Well, if there are a few, one other question was when will the data bowl for
2023 begin? Yeah, so I would assume September, October 2022. Just sort of towards the beginning
of the year. So I would assume September, October 2022. And then I would assume September, October
2022. Just sort of towards the beginning of the NFL season for the 2022 season. But again,
there's still plenty of time left for this big data bowl. So if you're interested, maybe you're
going to be less busy during that time. So that might make more sense. But if you're interested,
I highly encourage you to still try to check it out. There's plenty of time still to get a
submission. Is there a reason why the data isn't? Yeah, the data is,
the NFL doesn't want to share the data. It's proprietary. Part of it is teams have access to
it. And you don't want to, it just doesn't make sense to sort of give it away to everybody outside
of this event. So maybe I'm not the best person to answer that question maybe. But yeah, we don't
share it outside of Big Data Bowl. What is the error? I don't know if there's like a RMSC I can
give you, but certainly there are some plays where there are mistakes. Sometimes when the ball's
punted and it's high up, it might lose a little bit of connection to the radios that are stationary.
I don't know if radios are there, but it might be a little bit harder to read where exactly it is.
So that's a possibility of error. Typically though for the Big Data Bowl, most of the error
written plays are removed. So everything should be good. I guess maybe a better way to, what we
can say is I think it's pretty accurate to, I believe it's six inches or something. It's pretty
close. Like it's at least less than a foot. Yeah. That seems, yeah. So it's less than a foot
of error typically. So it's pretty good in that regard.
Awesome. There's a few other questions around like specific packages that I think might be
helpful to cover maybe after the next part as well.
Okay. Yeah. That sounds good. So I'll jump in to my code if no one else has any questions.
So yeah, I'm sharing this from Kaggle and unfortunately I couldn't figure out a way
to make it bigger. So hopefully this is readable for everybody. If it's not, I can zoom in,
but I'm hoping everyone is able to read it. That looks good to me.
Okay, good. So the first code sample I'm going to do, and this is stuff that I've
publicly shared before. We're going to discuss using the big data, bold data of 2022 to analyze
kick attempt offset from center, which is a metric that we're creating. And you can only
really create with the tracking data. So the first question is like, what exactly is this metric?
So as football fans would know, kickers are, part of it is a field goal kicker will try to
kick a ball in between the field goal posts. As you can see in this image right here,
the goal would be to make it inside. And depending on whether it's an extra point
or a field goal, it's either three or one point. That's not necessarily relevant here.
But as you try to make it through, as you might, as you're, if you're kicking it, let's say a soccer
ball or a hockey puck, assuming maybe there's no goalie there, but you try to get it as centered as
possible because that would increase your chance of making it. So what we're doing here is we're
going to measure how close to the center as a, as the ball goes to the uprights, a typical field
goal kicker might be. And that's just a way for us to say, who's the most accurate, who's best at
getting it right in between the posts. Maybe there's also an element of luck. Maybe one player
might, one kicker might be 90%, making 90% of their field goals, but a lot of their field goals
were barely in, where another player was kicking 89% and all their field goals were completely in.
And that just is a way to say, maybe there's a little bit of luck going on here. And in the
future, we might expect this other kicker to be doing better. So this is just a way to measure
kicker skill, looking at that, that offset from center. So we're going to load up some libraries,
tidyverse, of course, animate, we're going to animate some stuff and we're gonna make a ridge
plot. So nothing, nothing too crazy in terms of packages to start. We're going to load in plays
data. Plays data, that's, you're going to see this in every sport. It's sort of like a description of
what's going on on a given play. And in football, it's a very sort of broken up sport in the sense
that you're playing and then you're not playing, then you're not. So each of the, each row will
represent a given play, a given series of like a snap, and then what happens after the snap.
Players, again, that might be that you're going to see that in every sport, every sport has players,
and this is just who they are. So we look at the head of the players variable, and we just have
an ID, we have their name, we have some other information. Really, we're just going to look,
we're going to really care about the ID and the name, or I guess it's the college name, but the
ID and the display name, which is their actual name. This is the plays variable. It's, you have
a game ID, a play ID, a quarter, down, distance, information like that. Okay, cool. So now we're
going to load in the tracking data, and the tracking data is very big, which makes sense.
You have, you're measuring it every 10th of a second, and you have a row for each player on each
10th of a second for each play. So it's going to be very large. You're going to, there's 11 players
per team and the ball. So for each 10th of a second, you're going to have 23, and typical
plays will last like four to six seconds. So, and there's also some time immediately after,
immediately before the play. So it grows really quickly. So that's why we have to load this in
iteratively, because it's big data. So we're going to load it in. We're going to look at the head,
and as you can see, we have a time, we have an X, we have a Y coordinate, we have an NFL ID,
which we can match the players, and we have a game ID and a play ID, which we can match the
plays, and a frame ID, which is sort of like what frame it is. You can match it across different
players on a given play. Some of these other variables we're not going to use here. We might
use them in the next one. S is speed, A is acceleration. So this is what the data we're
going to be working with looks like. So next, we're going to think about cleaning the data.
So one thing to note is, and I'm going to show you a map of what the data looks like,
we have an X and a Y. And this is just something that, this is an NFL field.
The X coordinate goes from end zone to end zone. The Y coordinate goes from one side of the field
across the other side of the field. And this is a way to look at it. So zero, zero is the corner
of the home end zone, where zero, 120, or sorry, 120, zero is the corner of the visitor end zone.
So football field's 100 yards between the end zones. Each end zone is 10 yards each.
One thing to note, and that's what we're about to do in the next part of code,
is because each team will change sides at the end of each quarter,
sometimes the offense and the kicker will be kicking in one direction. Sometimes they'll be
kicking in the other direction. So as you can see, the X and the Y coordinates don't necessarily
change with who has the ball, which direction they're going, which direction they're kicking.
So one thing that it's important to do is to check the play direction. That's the direction
that the team is kicking, or in this case kicking, or the direction the offense is going and flipping
it. So that way it's consistent. So if you're kicking a field goal, you're never going to be,
you're always going to be kicking a field goal the same direction in the coordinates.
So we're flipping it. So that way, no matter what, the team will be kicking this way.
That's somewhat arbitrary. We could say they're always kicking this way, but
just to keep it consistent, we don't want a field goal kicker to be kicking towards this end zone,
a field goal kicker kicking towards this end zone, to look totally different. We want to
be able to compare them apples to apples, since they're essentially the same.
So we do that flip. We take the tracking data. We look at, we filter for when it's the football.
The tracking data also contains players. In this case, we only care about the football,
although we're interested in who's kicking it. We're not, we're really just curious about the
trajectory, not what the kicker is doing as they kick it. We don't really care about that.
We're taking the football. We're looking at the X coordinate and we're seeing, okay,
where we want plays where the lag of X, the play previously, and before I, let me note that I'm
grouping by game and play. So that way we're only looking at specific for a given game and given
play and we're arranging by the game play and the frame. So that way we're making sure we're
looking in order. So we're filtering for plays where you have passed the 120 mark, but your
previous, the previous X was before the 120 mark. So we're really sorry to look at the map. We're
really looking right back here and that's where the upright is located. We're filtering for the
spot right when they cross this back end zone, right when they would be crossing the uprights.
We're selecting the first occurrence just in case maybe it rolls after we don't want any
weirdness going on. And then we're calculating the key metric here, which is offset from center.
So we're taking the Y variable, the cross field variable, and we're figuring out the difference
between it and the center, which we kind of see as the goal. We want, an ideal kick will be
just down the middle as they might say. So we're taking the difference between where that Y variable
is in the center. So then for each game and each play, we're only selecting these variables. We have
the offset from center. So an ideal offset from center would be zero. A bad offset from center
might be like 10. The goal posts are about, or I think 18 and a half feet apart. All these coordinates
are in yards, which is the coordinates of football. So I think about six point something is the length
of the uprights. So if you're outside of 3.3, if you're 3.5 and above, about you're probably
going to be missing the kick. So that's not good. You want to be making it and you want to be making
it just down the middle. So we're merging it to the plays variable. We're only looking at plays
when there's a field goal attempt. Removing plays when the field goal attempt was short.
We're looking at the yards from the end zone just so we have a sense of how far was this kick. We
don't want, we want to, because if you're kicking very close, if it's an easy kick, we want to treat
that differently than if you're kicking from a very far distance. And so we're calculating the
kick length, which is the yards from the end zone, plus 18, which takes into account the length of
the end zone and some other factors. We're joining the players, so that way we have the names. We're
joining this metric that we had. So now we're only going to look at what we're interested in. We're
going to look at the game ID, the play ID, the name of the kicker, how long the kicker, the field
goal kick was, and what the offset from center is. And that's the outcome variable. So we know that
yeah, kicking a 50-yard field goal versus kicking a 20-yard field goal, for those of you who know
football, those are very different in difficulty. So we want to make sure when we're looking at this
offset from center variable, we're being fair. So this is what our final variable, our final thing
looks like. We have game ID, play ID, we have a display name, we have a kick length, we have offset
from center, and we have a description of what happened. Okay, cool. So before we sort of get
into visualizing and figuring out who's the best in this metric, it's ideal to animate a play or two.
So we're going to use this field from Marshall Furman's GitHub. We're going to just select a
random play. Oh, I guess we're selecting a play with the minimum offset from center to give an
example. This is one where it was really like a very perfect kick, and we're joining that to the
tracking just to select that one out. I'm not going to go too deep into all these sort of colors.
Essentially, I'm setting a lot of colors and widths just to make sure the field looks good.
I'm setting the plot titles, the play description, which is this variable, just sort of saying
what happened. I'm going to do an animation using ggplot and ggfield. I'm adding a segment
for the uprights. So I'm going to animate each point, and it's going to look similar to what we
saw previously right before I took the first break. We're going to add some points, and we're
going to animate what the players look like and the ball as this field goal goes in using geom
point and adding some colors and some text for the jersey numbers. So this is what it looks like.
So we see this was the kick with the lowest offset from center, so the best in the metric,
and this is a 50-yard field goal. I think the other one, yeah, so we're looking at 50-yard
field goals only here. So as you can see, the field goal here gets it, and if you look right
there, it looks perfectly just down the middle. This is about as in between those uprights as you
can get, so that's what we're saying is what we see as an ideal kick. We now can animate one,
but instead look at the max offset from center when looking at a 50-yard kick. So this one might
be the one that was the worst in terms of being able to kick it between the uprights.
So as you can see, this one wasn't really that close. It was a couple yards out of the uprights.
It wasn't made. It was not a good kick, and compared to this one that was just down the
middle, which was perfect, this one was not good. And I mean, another thing you can think of is if
they're going to miss it, you probably feel a little bit more promise with their performance
if they're missing it just outside this one that you missed decently outside.
Okay, cool. So we're going to visualize this metric by kicker. So as we saw before,
we were able to merge who's kicking on a given play to this metric, and that way we have a
sense of who's doing well in this metric. And for this, we'll just look at all kicks between 30 and
40 yards just because there's the biggest sample size there. And again, we don't want to use a
kick length that is... We don't want to vary by kick length because maybe some kickers are just
taking easier field goals. We don't want to give them the benefit of the doubt there. So we're
grouping by the display name, which is the name of the kicker. We're limiting for only kickers
who have 75-plus attempts. We don't want to have a kicker who had one attempt that was perfect
and be showing him as the best when we know that maybe he wouldn't be as good if he had
a better, a bigger sample size. So we're grouping by that. We're filtering for a sample size of 75
or more, and then we're calculating the average offset from center. We're doing a ggplot. We're
doing a barplot, and we're setting the theme, labels, other stuff. And now look at this. We have
a plot that will give us the kicker average offset from center
ordered from the best kicker to the worst kicker. And for those of you who know NFL football,
it's probably not a surprise that Justin Tucker is seen as the best kicker. He's universally seen
as probably the best kicker today, and certainly over 2018 to 2020. I think a lot of people would
say he's probably the best kicker over that time. The worst kicker is Adam Benatarian,
although he historically was a very good kicker. His 2019 season and his 2018 season, I think his
last two, were probably not his best. So that's why he might be not as high in this metric
compared to some others. So again, we can compare. On average, they're all making them,
and that makes sense because typical kicker today is probably making 80, 90 percent.
And if it was greater than three, maybe we could say maybe on average they're missing. But on
average, it's in between the uprights, but they vary in terms of how close to right down the
middle they are. Tucker, unsurprisingly, is the best, and then you see a lot sort of in the middle.
He's the best by a wide margin, which also would agree with intuition. We're going to take this
exact same data and look at it as a ridge plot, as a series of density plots. That will give us
a little bit more information as opposed to a bar, which is just one average. We can see maybe
some kickers are just wild. They're sometimes very good, sometimes very bad, so they look average.
Maybe some kickers are just typically right at a certain range, and looking at a density plot will
give us a sense of whether this is a consistent kicker that consistently is at where it's at, or
maybe he is sometimes right on the money, sometimes is a little bit off. So we're going to
use GeomDensityRidges from the ggridges package to plot this, and again, I ordered the exact same
way by smallest average, but yeah, Tucker, we can see it is fairly consistent. Adam Binateri,
he probably has one of the flattest distributions. Sometimes he was really good, sometimes he was
really bad, and that sort of agrees with what we saw. In 2019, he wasn't very good at all. 2018,
he was decent. So this is the first code that I'm going to share. The second one,
I might go through a little bit quicker, but maybe I might stop for questions here,
but also people can ask at the end again. So does anyone have any questions?
I can start with reading a few from Slido, and just a reminder, if you don't mind,
if you're putting questions in the Zoom chat, I love to see them there too. I just want to
make sure I don't miss any, if you don't mind copying them over to Slido. But one of the
questions is, what are some preferred packages for best dealing with XY data? Yeah, so I mean,
I typically just use the tidyverse metrics, but I definitely know that there are some that are
pretty good. I know Ben Baldwin has a package, and I can't think of it off the top of my head,
but he has a package that does some data cleaning for next-gen stats data, such as what you might
see in the big data bull. That's something I would suggest to just start, but I mean,
there's a lot of different ways to tackle it. It really depends on what you're doing, and there
are some spatial packages that sometimes would make sense if you're doing a specific thing, but
sometimes, typically what I do is I just can use tidyverse, and I guess I would also recommend
some animation packages, such as gganimate, just because with this data, it's hard to even know
what's going on, even if you're looking at, I like to use view sometimes, just look at
what data I'm dealing with. Even that sometimes is really difficult because there's so much going on,
so always animating, using some sort of animation package to animate the data
goes leaps and bounds in terms of understanding what's going on.
Awesome. One other question is, what insights are you most interested in with this year's competition?
You know, that's a great question. I don't know if there's, obviously the theme is special,
teams. The advice I would give is not necessarily any specific insight, but if you're going to do
an insight, if you're going to participate, I would suggest rather than trying to solve
10 problems at once and say, here's a metric that looks at punters on punt plays, and here's
another metric that looks at field goal kickers, and here's another play that looks at kickoff,
here's a metric that, a bunch of metrics for a bunch of different things, I would highly
suggest looking at one specific player and, or not one specific player, one specific position,
one specific position on a specific play type, and really digging deep. Definitely teams and
analytic staffers from teams are going to be the judges, so those that are the judges definitely
gain a lot more when it's something really in-depth that solves one issue rather than trying
to solve special teams with tracking data all in one submission. So I would just suggest
whatever you do, and there's plenty of things you can look at with punting, kicking,
honestly, even if it seems simple, that can go leaps and bounds if it's done well.
Just don't try to tackle every single problem. Just find something that
you're interested in and that you can do well and just tackle that really, really well.
Awesome. Is it okay to ask a few more?
Oh, I'm sorry. Go ahead, Rachel.
I just want to check with you, Tom, if it's okay to ask a few more now.
Yeah, sure. Are there any specific to this one? Otherwise, I can jump to the next thing, which I'll probably go through a little bit faster,
maybe skip the cleaning steps and just focus on the results.
Tom, there's been quite a bit of discussion in the chat about the z-coordinate,
especially as it relates to the innovation that you created. Can you talk a little bit about
what's available, what isn't available for that?
Yeah. So unfortunately, we don't measure the z-coordinate with our tracking data currently,
but I would say there are definitely ways to figure it out, whether it be looking at the
event data so that there's events that are tagged like field goal kick, field goal make, field goal
miss, or kickoff land. That, as well as you could use the PFF hang time data to get a sense of when
it landed. So I would say that there are certainly ways to use, to infer the z-coordinate. You know
the speed. You know how long it was in the air. You know where it landed. You can get a sense of
what the z-coordinate is using. And I'm a physics person, so I like physics a lot. So using kinematics
as, and I think there has been some work on that, maybe in previous big data bowls, but definitely
that's something that could be inferred using some of the other variables. But unfortunately,
it's not measured on site.
Thank you. I see a few people have put their their name when they ask the question on Slido,
so I'd love to like turn the mic over to you to have you ask those, if that's okay. Amelia, I see
you asked a question about different factors pertaining to the kicker. Would you like to ask
that one live? Sure. Hi, I was just curious if how you thought about using age as a factor
in these kickers and how they perform? You know, not in this specific analysis, but that's
definitely something that could be explored. And maybe especially, although it's only three years,
which maybe isn't a huge sample size of years, this is the first time when we have multiple years
of data. So maybe that is something to look at. But yeah, definitely something that you should
think about exploring. And you have the birth dates from the players data, so you should feel
free to explore that. Awesome. Brian, I see you had a, Brian Filker had another question as well,
if I could pass the mic over to you. Yeah, of course. Yeah, Tom, I was kind of curious on
factors such as like, you know, wind direction and speed, those are kind of things you're trying
to find like a uniformity, you know, in setting the kick direction, different stadium constructs,
and how I always think of, you know, Phil Dawson always mentioned with the Cleveland Browns, how
we had a special flag installed, so we can see the wind direction, wind speed to factor into his
kicks. Is that taken into consideration at all? Yeah, so again, not for this analysis. And this
was sort of built to get people started. Definitely, I would highly suggest if you're
going to look at that and you're interested in weather stuff, definitely go for it.
I posted on the Kaggle website. So external data for this competition is totally free to use as
long as it's publicly available to everybody for free. So I would highly encourage you to seek out
weather data. I posted some on the Kaggle site and tweeted some and it's also on my GitHub.
But also there are plenty of other sources you can use for weather data. So feel free to use it.
And I would, if you are participating in that, if you want to use that, I would highly encourage
you to do so. Thanks. Awesome. Mitch, I know that you're monitoring the Slido as well,
and just wanted to check, are there any other questions you think we should ask now?
One of the questions was about statistical modeling techniques. And Tom, can you, maybe I'll
just throw my two cents in here to kind of underscore something that you said about finding
something particular and doing it really well. So just as what you just described, for instance,
didn't necessarily include any sort of sophisticated modeling technique. It required
really good intuition, understanding of the sport and some understanding coordinate information.
And you're able to see a really meaningful metric as the output. So for those of you who
are maybe thinking this is a mountain of data, I'm going to apply this super sophisticated
modeling technique. By all means, have at it. There's certainly things to do there.
But at the same time, really good intuition and understanding of the game and just some
understanding coordinate information, you can have some really meaningful output as well.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. I would echo that.
Awesome. Thanks, Tom. I'll pass it back over to you to continue the presentation,
and we'll save the rest for the end too.
Perfect. Perfect. Yeah. So I'm probably just going to skip the cleaning and the reading data for the
second thing. But I'll briefly go over what the metrics about and talk about the modeling
technique. So another thing that another demo that we put together, we looked at speed on
kickoff plays. So the kickoff, special teamers are planned to sprint down the field, try to
kick off to the end zone and try to make a tackle. And they try to run as fast as possible
to prevent the return team from gaining yards. So for those of you who know football, you know
the kickoff. So essentially, when the kicker kicks it off, all the other members of the
the kickoff team are sprinting as fast as possible. One thing that we can look at is
what is their speed? How fast do they go on these plays? So I'm going to skip the cleaning and the
reading, although those are very important, just sort of talking about a type of model that
we like to use at the league. And it's also just something that applies here. So essentially, we
assume the data has already been cleaned. Basically, what we have is we have a game ID,
a play ID, an NFL ID. So a given player on the kickoff team and their max speed during the play,
and we're going to try to model that. And also, we also have surface, which we merge,
which is also part of it. So we're going to create a mixed effects model. And the mixed effects
model sort of to account for lack of independence among observations, we assume that each player is
sort of from the same population of players, and no player is going to be drastically faster than
another. So we assume that each player is from a distribution. And as they sprint more, as we get
more observations, we sort of have more of a posterior and can assume where that player might
be. If they have few observations, we assume that they're probably close to the overall league mean
in terms of speed. So we're just modeling the max speed taking into account the NFL ID and the
surface. So again, I'll try to go a little bit quickly through this. We have a model that takes
into account. We assume players are a random effect, meaning if we have a lot of information
about them, we're going to sort of believe what the information says. Otherwise, if they have one
observation, we're going to assume that they're probably closer to the mean. And that's just to
prevent a player with one really good observation to be leaps and bounds better than a player with
very few. And if we were to do a sort of a dummy variable or a factor variable for each NFL ID,
we'd probably overfit and have a ton of variables. So this is just a way to
have sort of a value for each NFL ID and not overfit. So we're going to look at the summary
of the model. We have fixed effects, which are the surface. That's a pretty typical thing.
That treats as sort of like a normal factor type variable. And then we have the NFL ID,
which is the intercept. That's, again, we're assuming it's from a population where all the
players from that population are more or less the same and will have more or less the same speed.
We can plot the results of the model, sort of the player effects. And again,
this is just to take into account the fact that the players will have a max speed effect
that is based on the fact that they're running across different surfaces.
And that's another advantage of it. And I realize I'm not explaining this well.
The each player will have an effect that is based upon how they've done across different surfaces.
But this modeling technique takes into account each surface. So perhaps it's really hard to run
fast on grass. Players that run fast on grass will have an adjustment to their coefficient.
It's kind of like any other model where each sort of variable will take each other into account
in order to have a value that makes sense. So what we get based on taking into account the surface,
figuring out what the effect or the intercept will be for each NFL ID in terms of figuring
out what their max speed will be, we have player effects that can kind of be thought of as
plus or minus what you might expect compared to the average player on the average surface.
So the thought is Matt Cole will typically be about 1.7 yards per second faster than the average
kickoff coverage player on the average surface. This is the top 25 of all the players in this
effect. So Y axis is player name. X axis is that plus or minus player effect. And we have the top
25 in this metric. So Matt Cole is the fastest. Devin Duvernay is the slowest of the top 25,
but he's still in the top 25. So this is just a way for us to take into account surface and
really measure how well we expect these players to do compared to the average player.
This is what the entire population looks like of these player effects. So it's a
left skewed distribution with mean zero, standard deviation around one, and
maybe actually more like around 0.5. And the distribution will give us information on
what this looks like. And you can see that the difference between the best player and the worst
player isn't necessarily that large. It's about two yards per second. The last thing that I'm
going to sort of touch with this part of the presentation is one thing that I would highly
suggest people do if they're planning on participating in the Big Data Bowl is to
analyze a model stability to make sure that, okay, if this model predicts well for the first season,
how well will it do in the second season? Or if this model predicts well for the beginning of
the season, how well will it do for the end of the season? It's a way to make sure that
your results are making sense and are picking up on something. So one thing that we can do here is
we can do the exact same process before to get the player effects, but do one model that is only
weeks one to eight, do another model that is only weeks nine to seventeen, and again we have
the NFLID, the display name, and their effect. NFLID, display name, and effect. So we have two
different models only using subsets of the data, and we can merge them together and compare them
using a sort of an xy plot. This red line is y equals one, so if everything perfectly goes
through that line, then that means we have a perfect fit. If everything, if anything is a
little bit off, then we're not getting a perfect fit. Based on the fact that
we sort of see obviously tree flowers here at the bottom seems a little bit off,
basically since we're seeing a pretty good fit line, we feel pretty confident.
And then we can do the, we can remove the outliers, we feel a little bit better.
Yeah, so then we can look at the r-squared, but yeah, this is just two things that I would say to
take away from this part is just one, really analyzing stability is a good way to make sure
your model is doing what you hope it does, and two, definitely there's a lot of
definitely there's a lot of different modeling techniques to look at here,
and definitely take into account if you're going to do something with a bunch of players,
doing a model with 300 different players each having their own variable can be difficult,
especially because each of them are going to have different number of observations,
they'll be playing different number of plays, they'll have different roles,
they'll be on different teams, so really thinking about that stuff is important.
So yeah, I'll pause again, and I understand I probably went through this section a little bit
fast, so hopefully people were able to catch stuff, but I'll pause again, and I can answer
some questions. I can answer through 1.15, hopefully I won't get kicked out of the room
that I'm in, and if I do, I'll just have to turn off video for a sec, and I can
jump back in answering questions. Thank you so much, Tom, that's awesome,
and yeah, no worries if you have to turn off video and run to another room, thank you for
taking the extra time. I see there's an anonymous question that you may have touched, I think you
touched upon this one already, is environmental data included or allowed in this big data bowl?
Yeah, it's not necessarily included with what we're providing, but it's certainly allowed as
long as it's publicly available, free to haul, so definitely allowed if you can find something
that you want to use. Awesome, Josh Goldberg, I see you had asked a question in Slido
around peak age, would you want to ask that question live, or add any other, any context?
Sure, I think Amelia kind of had a similar question to it before, but I was just curious
if you had looked into any of the kind of distribution for how that metric offset by
center, what that looks like for players over the course of their career, if that
kind of is a certain peak age to when players are, you know, have the lowest absolute value there,
kind of what that looks like. Yeah, no, I have not, but really I would just say that's a great
big data bowl project if somebody wants that to take what I was doing there and take it a step
further. We really, like the only, the data we provided was 2018 to 20, but honestly that's
essentially all the data that we at the league have, because that's when it was really being
recorded. So realistically, no, I probably, the coolest thing about this data is answering
questions, because it's so new, you might be one of the first people, if not the first people, person
to answer that question. So no, I didn't look at it in this analysis, but I would highly recommend
anyone who's interested in the big data bowl to look at that, because I think that'd be a cool project.
Great, thank you. Let's see, going over to Slido, for the XY coordinators, how does it work with
with sidelines? And Zach, I see you've actually asked this question, if you want to jump in and
add some context there. Right, yeah, I was looking, mainly looking at kick returns and punt returns,
and of course, quite often they run it over to the sideline. I see that it starts with
zero and zero on the home sideline, I presume it just goes into negative coordinates?
Yeah, that's exactly right. So if your returner and you run out, if this mouse is the returner
and you're running out right here, you're probably going to be around like negative
one, negative two. And then if you go above it, you're going to be above 53 and a third, which is
where the field ends. It'll just be above 53 and a third, and if you're out of your own end zone,
you'll be negative, and if you're above 120, you'll be above 120. Perfect, thank you very much.
Yep, absolutely. Thank you, and I see a few people had asked questions about where
the data is, and also how to access the code, and Mitch had shared the link in the chat window,
so you can access that there. Yeah, and I tweeted out the code that I shared,
as well as the link to the Big Data Bowl for my Twitter, at datawithbliss, so feel free to go on
there, and all those links are going to be available. You can also just google Kaggle
Big Data Bowl 2022, all of this will show up. Awesome, there's a broad question as well,
which I think is awesome to ask all of our speakers, but they asked, what is the best
advice or courses for someone who has little understanding in R to develop better skills?
And everybody in the audience, feel free to share examples in the chat as well, but I'll
ask you this first, Tom. Yeah, so I would say a lot of how I learned R was just, I did a lot
of learning sort of by doing, and hopefully that helps the question, maybe that doesn't
answer the question completely, because I don't know if I have a specific tutorial or anything
that I leant on, but essentially, I think the first thing I've ever done in R, it was a class
I took in undergrad, and it was, I just, you could do a project kind of in whatever you wanted,
and I just said, oh, I'm interested in, I'm interested in basketball, I'm gonna just do
something, and if you do something that you're interested in with R, the more you do it,
it's gonna be easier for you to keep at it, because you're gonna be interested in the results,
you're gonna be interested in the project, and then by the end, you're gonna get a little bit
better, and if you keep doing stuff like that, that's interesting to you, eventually you're gonna
get very comfortable with it, and it's not easy. I definitely didn't learn R overnight, and
all this code took, I mean, I think I've probably been using it for maybe five, six years now,
all of it took a lot of practice, but anyone can get there as long as they keep at it,
and keep practicing, and keep getting better.
Awesome, thank you, and I was just adding into the chat as well, I see a few people were sharing
really helpful links, also on the R for Data Science online learning community, I just put
the Slack link to join, we do have a sports analytics channel there, which could be a
great place for people to connect after the fact as well, and share resources there too.
Amelia, I see you have another question that's been upvoted a bit as well, can I,
have you asked that one live too?
Sure, so I was just curious if you took into account the number of starts a player had on
a kickoff return, for example, and how that went into account in your model, and the accuracy of it.
Yeah, again, I mean, this was kind of a bit of a simplification, sort of a quick thing,
and I would, maybe I'll sound like a broken record, I would just, I would say like,
I have not, and I think that's something that would be interesting to look at, so
definitely if you're thinking about a big datable submission, including trying that with your model,
or building off of what I did here, and adding that is definitely something to think about.
Awesome. Stephen Hill, I see that you had asked a question in the Zoom chat earlier,
on vertical positioning data, do you want to jump in and add some context there?
Sure, I think, I think Tom might have addressed that, but definitely would be great to have
vertical positioning data, but you know, I think you mentioned that you didn't have it,
but it might be able to be inferred.
Yeah, that's what I would say, and honestly, I guess how I would suggest doing it is,
there's an event tagging of when a kickoff, or when a punt was, like occurred, or when a field
goal was kicked, and even if you can't, if the event tag is off, you can kind of infer based on
when you see the ball start to move in a given direction. I would use that combined with the
hang time variable, and you can figure out how long it was in the air, and let me think, maybe
you can, and, and if you don't even, maybe you can just do it using the hang time variable,
and kind of, yeah, you can actually just use the hang time variable in kinematics to get a sense
of what the z coordinate is, because, and not to get too physicsy here, but we can assume that
gravity is constant, and you can figure out if it's in the air for this long, and then it will
feel a constant acceleration of gravity, then eventually it will, like, like, you, you can
figure out, like, if it was in the air for this long, you know what gravity is, you know it had
to have reached this z height, and then you can figure out, like, if it was in the air for this
you know it had to have reached this z height, and then you can tie that to the time, and then
once you tie it to the time, you can get an x and a y, so I would, I would google kinematics,
and there's a way to infer doing that. Great, thank you. I am, I see a few people had also
asked about where the recording will be shared. I just shared a few helpful links there. We do have
tomorrow off at RStudio, but I'll share the recording by Friday afternoon to the RStudio
YouTube, and I put the link there in the chat, and then also on the meetup page, and on LinkedIn, too.
Tom, are you getting kicked out yet? I don't think so, so yeah. Okay, awesome.
There's an anonymous question that was, was positioning of cameras on the field for video
capture an important factor for this? Yeah, so as I might have said at the beginning, there are
several leagues, including NBA, NHL, I think, and soccer that use video tracking data. The NFL
isn't one of them. It's based off chips that are located in the shoulder pads of each player and
in the ball, so camera angles was not a factor in this at all. It's more based on a real, like, a
signal from the chips to the processor. Great, thank you, and I see a few more questions are
coming in on the Zoom chat, as well. I'm trying my best just to organize them from the Slido,
but feel free to raise your hand if there's a question I've missed and you want to ask live, too.
I see one. Go ahead. Oh, you see someone? I was going to say, someone asked if stadium nets are
standard. The question, yes, they are, but sorry, go ahead. Okay, perfect. The other question,
anonymous question, was how does hang time work with onside kickoffs? Is there any description
or data around the type of roll bounce of onside kicks? Yeah, let me, let me try to think. So,
Yeah, let me, let me try to think. So, in the PFF data, I would suggest looking at kick contact type
for onside kicks. I don't know, again, PFF is, I don't know the data, that data, like, as well,
maybe as I know the tracking data, but I would check that. I'm pretty sure the hang time would
just be how long until, I think the definition is it's how long, once the ball goes into the air,
how long until it touches the ground. Obviously, as some would know with onside kicks, sometimes
you will kick it in the air and then have it land and then bounce, so that the hang time will be
rather low. So, in that sense, it might be a little bit difficult to figure out exactly
what's going on with, like, the z-coordinate on onside kicks, assuming it, if there is a bounce,
but I would try, look at kick contact type in addition to, yeah, hang time and kick contact
type are probably your best bet, but admittedly, it might be information that's hard to get.
Thanks, Tom. I see there's also some conversation going on in the chat around Williams, or
Wilbert's question, around what are good free NFL data sets that are available to the public and can
be used. Absolutely, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, NFL Faster is a package that has a lot of really good
free data sets and I think a lot of questions I think I might have seen on Twitter and the
Kaggle discussion page before were like, oh, how do we figure out who the fumbling player is? How do
we do that? How do we, and honestly, I would just suggest using NFL Faster and they
merge very easily to the data that we're providing, they merge on Game ID and Play ID,
so that's something I would recommend. I would recommend, I mean, the weather data that I
provided also you can use with Game ID and Play ID if that's of interest. Yeah, I think those
would probably be the main two, but there are tons of stuff out there and, yeah, the package that
Ben Baldwin wrote I think could also be helpful. Wonderful. I think we've made it to the end of
the Slido questions, but I just want to do a double check from the Slack here and I see
Matthew asked, is there a way to access the chat transcript after the meeting? I will go through
that and then copy the links and I'll share that in the YouTube recording and then in the,
like, on the Meetup discussion page too. I'm not sure if anybody, I'm allowed to download the chat,
you might be able to if you see three dots, you can press save, might just only be available to me.
And Tom Mock I think said something, I would definitely agree looking at NFL Reader,
I think NFL Faster and NFL Reader are connected, but I would absolutely recommend looking at NFL
Reader too, because NFL Faster I think is better for live data, but yeah, NFL Reader also is a good
one. Awesome. I'm just going to open it up if anybody wants to raise their hand and ask a
question if I've unfortunately missed something from earlier or if you have a new question you'd
like to ask before we end today. I've got a question if it's possible to ask.
Sure. I was wondering, with punt returns and kick returns, is it possible to perhaps do expected
yards, sorry, expected yards, sorry, rushing yards over expected and use the NFL data that's
available that they already have from models before or would we have to build it ourself?
I'm guessing, let me see, is Mike Lopez on? He's probably a better person to ask, but I think it
probably, yeah, Mike, go ahead. Yeah, I think that your best two steps, Zach, are the initial
expected rush yards on Kaggle from the 2020 Big Data Bowl, that framework is there. I think
probably more aptly in terms of copying and pasting code, Ben Baldwin, who Tom mentioned
earlier, he looked at using that same framework with defensive coverage schemes, so like man
versus zone, and I want to say his code is public. Those are your two best bets. I wouldn't be
surprised if somebody this year goes and also replicates it. If you're trying to be that person,
you know, I think those two places would be where to go and get started there.
Thank you very much. Of course.
Thank you. I'll open it up to any other remaining questions, too.
Well, thank you all so much for joining, and thank you, Tom, that was amazing. I really
appreciate your time and sharing all your insights with us. Just a reminder, we'll share all the
links and the recording up to the RStudio YouTube and on the Meetup page and on LinkedIn, but if
you ever have any questions at all or can't find something, feel free to reach out to me. You can
just email me, rachel at rstudio.com, or on Meetup and LinkedIn. Thank you so much, Tom.
Thank you. Thanks, everyone, for listening today.
Have a great rest of the day, everyone.